well it is a controversial topic on a
Toronto University campus this month
some people on the campus saying
pronouns like he/she him or her do not
represent them accurately now the
University wants staff to use alternate
pronouns but Jordan Peterson is a
psychology professor at the University
and he is refusing to do that take a
look at this reason I'm defending
freedom of speech in a civil society
Peterson do you have any comments on the
Nazi presence at your protest the
presence of Nazis and white supremacists
assaulting people at your protest you
have any comment on that
yeah differences I'm speaking out the
way I'm speaking out because I think
this is a route to no violence and
violence is lurking and you can say that
that sounds like a threat it was no
violence at our protest oh my gosh ah
will you refer to me if it wasn't for
this law and I asked you to report me we
thought he done perhaps what you had
your answer was no note if it helped oh
so just an example of how things have
become heated at the University of
Toronto that's seen showing different
groups of students some confronting the
professor about his position others
supporting him now Peterson says this is
about free speech but aw Pete is also a
professor at the University of Toronto
who says that Peterson's language is
abusive joining us right now is
professor Jordan Peterson as well as
professor awp thank you for joining us
today thanks professor Peterson let's
begin with you why are you against the
use of alternate pronouns I know I'm
against the use of legislation to
determine what words up that myself and
other people are required to utter but
would you use alternate pronouns if a
student asked you to I think I've made
my position on that clear already well
perhaps not to our audience at home who
are just being introduced to this would
you use alternate announced and why not
I because I don't believe that other
people have the right to determine what
language I use especially when it's
backed by punitive legislation and when
the words that are being required are
the constructions there are artificial
constructions of people
I regard as radical ideologue who's
viewpoint I do not share well i we have
a graphic to show our audience at home
at just some of the pronouns being used
or asked to be used as alternates among
them you see here Z or Zim Z or here Z
or 0 also hey or a rather and per so
just some of the alternate pronouns
there a professor Pete when you hear
professor Peterson saying that this is
oppressive how do you respond to that um
well the Peterson drama has done real
harm to real people on campus he's made
it harder to be transgender or
non-binary I know this from personal
experience I'm non-binary and
transgender and I know how it's felt to
be on the UFT campus for the last month
and I also know from private
communications with other effective
people you know in New Zealand where I
grew up
academics have a statutory role and
trained in the Education Act to be a
critic and conscience of society so I
think that's an idea of worth exporting
to Canada so I'd like to give Peterson
about a B+ for his critic role recently
and an F for the conscience part a
student once said to me when I finally
obtained tenure now professor that now
that you have obtained super powers you
must agree to use them for good for
peace and justice so I invite Peterson
to start doing more of that well
professor Peterson those who are asking
for this alternate use of use of rather
of alternate pronouns they are saying it
boils down to respecting their human
rights how do you respond to that
I don't think it boils down to
respecting their human rights I think
that it's an imposition on freedom of
speech that's being implemented at a
legislative level I also think that if
there was a naturally evolving solution
to the linguistic problem that's being
posed by a small fraction of the
transgender community that people would
have already adopted it we've never had
a situation we think with in in the
usage of English before that required
legislation to produce a transformation
in the manner in which people spoke has
a very dangerous precedent so it's one
thing to tell people what they can't say
so for example we have legislation
making it illegal to do such things as
deny the Holocaust it's a completely
different thing to demand that people
use certain words when they're
formulating their own ideas and I mean I
can get it's also absurd I mean here's
one thing that's happened that I don't
believe the formulators of this
legislation ever foresaw so in New York
City for example there are now 31
protected gender identities and I see no
reason whatsoever why each of those
gender identities can't demand the use
of their own pronoun and that absurd
things like that have been happening on
the University of Michigan campus for
example where students have been given
permission to tell faculty members and
others what pronouns they're to be
addressed by and they're multiplying
rapidly out of control so the law is bad
from a ethical perspective it's sloppily
written and besides that the solution
that it imposes is practically untenable
well I sorry excuse me for jumping in
but I want to bring in professor Pete
here because we did show those words to
our audience at home and perhaps to the
control room can show our audience once
again when you look at those alternate
pronouns I think it's fair to say that
some people will see that at home and
see that as very unwieldly if you will
what do you say to those types of
criticisms including the one you just
heard from Professor Peterson um well
I'd like to encourage people struggling
with us to be kind as their first
impulse you know we call somebody what
they want to be called in our society
for instance I don't call somebody Julie
if they prefer to be called daughter
that's just basic human courtesy here's
a great little tip for people who are
despairing at the possibility of
remembering some all those pronouns what
I do is just program in the pronoun next
to the person's name in my smartphone so
whenever I'm about out and about and
I've forgotten whether one of my trans
friends use a Z or zero or they or them
or something else I just look it up and
it's really super easy one thing I'd
like you to really look at in regard to
this controversy is to watch out for
who's getting centered in a discussion
political correctness is code that
powerful people use when they're annoyed
that they're actually not the center of
attention in any given discussion and
Bill shocks that c16 is actually not
about cisgender people it's about
protections for transgender people and
that's not you know it's not about
Peterson so you know we should have
people learning to listen more we have
two ears and one mouth for a very good
reason when things get political I like
to ask who benefits and who gets to
decide the rules of the game so you know
mostly with this Peterson controversy
which is really just a small drama
tempest in a teapot you know he could
just get over learning to program a few
pronouns into his phone by the way I
only have half a dozen or so that I
actually use on an everyday basis so
it's not all that difficult sorry now as
we've good job because I think professor
Peterson wants to get in on that
yeah well kindness is the excuse that
social justice warriors use when they
want to exercise control over what other
people think and say so you know if
we're banding back and forth
our differences in values you know I
would say that the highest possible
value is truth and that one of the
concomitant is that is that is that we
need stringent protection for freedom of
speech so that we can utter the truths
that we see fit and I think that that's
a value that's much higher than than
kindness for example I mean there's lots
of situations in life where where
kindness in the immediate present is not
the appropriate way to react at all but
so for example when you discipline
children you often hurt their feelings
in the short term so that they can learn
to behave properly in the medium to long
term so that their lives go well and so
this automatic assumption that the
people on the social justice warrior
side of the equation are motivated only
by kindness when they're also clearly
motivated by power is something I find
completely untenable and I don't think
that Pete's solution to program my
cellphone so that I can remember what
names people need to be called is a
reasonable solution at all we're
actually supposed to now use electronic
devices to bolster our ability to speak
freely how to cases when someone is it
so difficult to remember a pronoun you
remember somebody's first name you
remember their telephone number I mean I
think that I don't remember people's
names very easily and I don't remember
their telephone numbers very easily and
when I see a stranger I call them by the
pronoun that seems to be in accordance
with their presented appearance so
that's they appear that way or them
that's you being lazy I think there's a
very high value that we should also be
aiming for in addition to truth by the
way through
about this whole controversy I have told
the truth at every turn so you know
trying to imply that that's not what's
happening on people on the social
justice amaya social justice warrior I
don't know but I think that we should be
aiming for pluralism this means
recognizing more than one set of
fundamental principles fostering
independent cultural traditions of
minorities and being willing to share
power with people who are different than
you I think if you just stop centering
this whole controversy on yourself and
how hard it is for you to accommodate
genderqueer people well have a little
bit of sympathy I mean those of us who
are trans encounter much more greater
and dignities every day and every week
of the month for example have you
recently had a bank employee accuse you
of trying to masquerade as yourself at a
bank and then locking down your ATM card
and credit cards so that you can't use
any money those are the sorts of
problems that trans people face every
day being out of housing being
considered you know considering suicide
these are really big problems my refusal
to pronet to use pronouns because
left-wing activists want me to use them
has nothing to do with whether or not
trans people are having difficulties in
society and I'd also like to point out
that I've had many letters of support
I've had many letters of support from
trans people and they tell me that the
trans the trans activists don't support
them and most trans people actually
wanted to be referred to as he or she
doesn't mean they were my friends
I'm transphobic they were to know a few
people just because you've told I didn't
you know those people you you don't know
the trans community like the trans
community does you've got no idea what
the trans offense rpida trends
professor I'm sorry to interrupt let's
let's let Professor Peterson finish his
thought please all right so the trans
activists aren't aren't proper
representatives of the trans community
because they haven't been elected by the
trans community there are the other
noises in the Jordan I'm not speaking
for anyone except myself and on behalf
of other people perhaps who want to use
who want to maintain the right to free
speech I'm not claiming that I'm a
representative of white people or white
man or any other group I'm speaking on
behalf of myself and so I'm not taking
but no sir professor Peter so let me
jump in there though because we have
seen an evolution of language there are
words that we don't use non-white
legislation well legislation or not
are words that have evolved we don't use
for example I'm Asian I would bristle
someone called me oriental that is an
evolution of how we use words how is
this different weather legislated or not
was great iron registration I just know
it said if I understand legislatively
but if at the heart of it is to allow a
student to study free of what they feel
is discrimination why not help that
along I already made my case for why not
help that alone I believe that this
legislation is extraordinarily dangerous
and there's other elements of it too
that we haven't even got to in our
society yet like the protection for
gender expression and I've looked at
gender expression in the Ontario Human
Rights Code and as far as I can tell
gender expression is best summarized in
a single word fashion because it's the
way that you present yourself in in
public with your clothing in your manner
of dress and so I also think that the
legislation that we are bringing forth
with bill c16 and that's already in
place in places like Ontario also makes
deposit makes fashion criticism
something akin to a hate crime and
because there's been so much noise about
the identity component of this we
haven't even talked about gender
expression this is appalling legislation
and the idea that referring to someone
by the pronoun of their choice is going
to radically improve their status in
society or their mental health is a
completely unproven assumption I think
it'll have exactly the opposite effect
professor when I professor Pete I want
to ask you because it's been brought up
a couple of times too professor
Peterson's point if the what this was so
popular if this was so needed there
would be a natural evolution there
wouldn't be need for legislation why the
need for for legislating this as opposed
to allowing it to evolve naturally well
bill sixteen C sixteen and the Ontario
Human Rights Code do not actually
legislate pronoun usage they don't
specify thirty one genders or anything
of the kind but let me jump in though
the university is essentially telling at
this point it's human human resources
people to use alternate pronouns in a
way legislating their staff to do this
no way the legislation or the
legislation also requires the university
made clear their concordance with that
that assumption on my part by mentioning
in the letter that asked me to silence
myself that I'm required to act in in
accordance with the provisions of the
Ontario Human Rights Act and so the
University no
full well that the legislation does
precisely what I suggest it does it's
not written precisely in bill C 16 it's
written in the Ontario Human Rights Code
and if you read the Ontario Human Rights
Commission policies on such things
you'll see very rapidly that utilization
of preferred pronouns is part of the
legislative package so that's just
excellent is region to slash in Jordan
you will find out that they're actually
called correct pronouns there's there's
no preference about this there is no
material there is any on terrorism there
is on the Ontario Human Rights
Commission website where the policies
laid out and if people don't believe
that they can just go look themselves
professor Peet when you hear that this
is a free speech issue that you hear
professor Peterson in this case
essentially saying that he doesn't want
to be legislated to adopt new language
what's your response to that well I
share a number of Jordans concerns about
freedom of speech and academic freedom
on campus these are both very very
important principles and they should
apply regardless of what kind of
politics you like for example if you're
a left winger or a right winner or an up
when you're a down winner or whatever it
is but you know the reason why we have
laws that protect academic freedom and
freedom of speech is primarily to
prevent government interference in
individuals lives in their business it's
they're really mostly to protect against
a form of structural violence and they
were these these free speech laws were
actually never intended to be used as
all purpose accountability shields you
know so that you don't have to be held
accountable for your actions I'm
perfectly willing to be held accountable
for my actions and the university has
already indicated the seriousness with
which they view my actions and I also do
not believe that free speech laws were
there to protect to to regulate violence
free speech laws are there because we
use free speech to identify problems in
our society generate solutions to the
problems and then reach a consensus so
freedom of speech is actually that is is
protection for the mechanism by which
our individuals and society properly
orient themselves across time it's not
it's not even a principle it's the
fundamental method by which our
societies manage to maintain the
stability that they do maintain
and so on it's one of the ways we do
that yes well I would say that it's the
fundamental way so and I mean I think we
could have a reasonable discussion about
that but because freedom of speech is so
tightly tangled up with with our the
means by which we solve problems I mean
I think you know and then I talk but I
get corrected when I speak publicly and
the fact that I'm being corrected
constantly by the people that I'm
speaking with helps orient my speech
properly and helps orient public
discussion properly and and I can tell
you too that if there wasn't something
absolutely vital at stake here that had
a lot more to do more than to do than
with just simple kindness there wouldn't
have been millions of people watching
for example the assault that took place
during the free speech rally that was
held a few days after I released the
video which I see that CBC conveniently
omitted to include in their video clips
at the beginning of this interview well
professor Peterson we would do we do
want to thank you or sorry we're at a
time here but I want to thank both of
you for joining us today that is the
University of Toronto professors Jordan
Peterson and aw Pete talking about what
has become a very big controversy at the
University of Toronto and beyond